New tutorial on ROS 2 topics (#344)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/Tutorials/Topics/UnderstandingROS2Topics.rst

.. _ROS2Topics:

Understanding ROS 2 topics
==========================

> **Goal:** Use rqt_graph and command line tools to introspect on ROS 2 topics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Goal:** Use rqt_graph and command line tools to introspect ROS 2 topics.
```

**Tutorial level:** Beginner

**Time:** 20 minutes

.. contents:: Contents
   :depth: 2
   :local:

Background
----------

> Topics are named paths over which nodes exchange messages.

Reviewer: To expand upon this, something like:

```
Topics act like a "bus", so there can be multiple nodes sending on a topic and multiple nodes receiving on a topic.
```
(I see that you do expand upon this more later on, but I think it is important to touch on this in the initial context)

Author: I think I made the best compromise on lines 19 and 20 possible for the definition here. I'm definitely behind having more detailed conceptual overviews for all the ros graph concepts. For now we just have the "Background" sections though, and we'll try to keep it as high level as possible.

Reviewer 2: What's there looks good to me, I'm happy with it if @clalancette is.

Reviewer: I put another comment in on how to rearrange the section to make it a bit more readable, but I'm good with the content.

> ROS 2 breaks complex systems down into many module nodes; this concept is covered in the tutorial "Understanding ROS 2 nodes".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ROS 2 breaks complex systems down into many modular nodes; this concept is covered in the tutorial "Understanding ROS 2 nodes".
```

> The nodes on either end of a topic path are referred to as publishers that publish information to a topic, and subscribers that receive information from a topic.

Reviewer: This sentence is awkward to read.  Following on from my previous suggestion, maybe something more like:

```
A node that sends data on a topic path is referred to as a publisher, and a node that receives data from a topic path is called a subscriber.
```

There is one other point to be made, in that a node can be a publisher for one topic and a subscriber to another topic simultaneously.  I'm not sure if we want to get into that here, but it is important for newcomers to understand that somewhere.

Reviewer 2: Well, they can also be a publisher and subscriber of the same topic... or not publish or subscribe to any topics... Basically nodes and pub/sub are completely decoupled. I'd actually avoid calling the nodes themselves "publishers" or "subscribers", and instead say "a node may publish data to any number of topics and simultaneously have subscriptions to any number of topics". This, in my opinion, avoids the confusion about whether or not a "publisher node" can also subscribe by avoiding those kinds of labels for the node in the first place, i.e. a node is a node is a node, and they may do any number of things additionally.

Topics are a vital element of the ROS graph.

> As you know, ROS 2 breaks complex systems down into many modular nodes.

Reviewer: I'm honestly not sure that the reader knows this :).  Maybe consider something like:

```
One of the strengths of ROS 2 is that it breaks complex systems into modular nodes.
```

Reviewer 2: Well they just finished (presumably) the previous tutorial which is "understanding nodes", so I guess they ought to...

Reviewer 2: Maybe, "as you may have learned in the previous tutorial, ROS 2 breaks complex..."

Reviewer: > Well they just finished (presumably) the previous tutorial which is "understanding nodes", so I guess they ought to...

Hm, maybe.  I guess I haven't seen the "Understanding nodes" tutorial, so I don't actually know.  Regardless, I don't particularly like that turn of phrase anywhere (it assumes a lot), so I'd still suggest removing it.

Author: Maybe removing "as you know" and just stating it as a fact?
```
 ROS 2 breaks complex systems down into many modular nodes.
```
And maybe mentioning that the topic came up in the Nodes tutorial?

Reviewer 2: That's fine by me.

> Topics are what allow data to move between those nodes, and therefore between different parts of the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Topics are one of the important ways that data moves between nodes, and therefore between different parts of the system.
```

Prerequisites
-------------

.. The previous tutorial, :ref:`ROS2Nodes`, provides some useful background information on nodes that is built upon here.

As always, don’t forget to source ROS 2 in **every new terminal you open**.

Tasks
-----

1 Setup
^^^^^^^

By now you should be comfortable starting up turtlesim.

Open a new terminal and run:

.. code-block:: bash

    ros2 run turtlesim turtlesim_node

Open another terminal and run:

.. code-block:: bash

    ros2 run turtlesim turtle_teleop_key

Recall from the previous tutorial that the names of these nodes are ``/turtlesim`` and ``/teleop_turtle`` by default.

2 rqt_graph
^^^^^^^^^^^

Throughout this tutorial, we will use rqt_graph to visualize the changing nodes and topics and the connections between them.

> The turtlesim tutorial tells you how to install rqt and all its plugins, including rqt_graph.

Author: What do you think about ``turtlesim`` then? Whenever I'm referring to it throughout the tutorials, I just say turtlesim, but it's technically a package isn't it?

> The turtlesim tutorial tells you how to install rqt and all its plugins, including rqt_graph.

Reviewer 2: If you're referring to the package, then yeah use pre, and I would say, in the particular case of turtlesim you probably always are. I guess you could be like "Turtlesim is great!", which would be slightly different. Often people refer to "Rviz" or "rViz", but I always just do `rviz` since it is both a package and something you can run on the terminal, and it's just simple/consistent. But I'll leave it up to you. I would say, anything with a `_` should be pre I think. Maybe a good example is `turtlesim_node` versus "turtlesim node"?

.. todo: :ref:`Turtlesim` for turtlesim

To run rqt_graph, open a new terminal and enter the command:

.. code-block:: bash

    rqt_graph

You can also open rqt_graph by opening rqt and selecting **Plugins** > **Introspection** > **Nodes Graph**.

Your graph will be blank.
Press the refresh button to the left of the dropdown list to see your two nodes.

To see the topic connecting them, choose **Nodes/Topics (active)** from the dropdown list.
Additionally, the number of **Namespaces** should be 0.

> .. todo: the above 4 sentences can be removed once the “nodes only” problem is fixed

Reviewer 2: 👍 to getting rid of these steps, you made this issue for the Nodes only not showing the topics:

https://github.com/ros-visualization/rqt_graph/issues/32

For the first part though, we should consider a new issue which is something like "bug: graph doesn't show unless you manually refresh" or "feature: graph should automatically refresh when something changes" (or it should be an option).

.. image:: rqt_graph.png

You should see the above nodes and topic, and if you hover your mouse over any of the elements, the color highlighting as well.

The graph is depicting how the ``/turtlesim`` node and the ``/teleop_turtle`` node are communicating with each other over a topic.
The ``/teleop_turtle`` node is publishing data (the keystrokes you enter to move the turtle around) to the ``/turtle1/cmd_vel`` topic, and the ``/turtlesim`` node is subscribed to that topic to receive the data.

The highlighting feature of rqt_graph is very helpful when examining more complex systems where with many nodes and topics connected in many different ways.

rqt_graph is a graphical introspection tool.

> Now we’ll look at some command line introspection for topics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we’ll look at some command line tools for introspecting topics.
```

Also, I'm not sure, but maybe we're supposed to use `command-line tools`. I'm not sure if that's right or not, but I see it a lot on the Internet.

3 ros2 topic list
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Running the ``ros2 topic list`` command in a new terminal will return a list of all the topics currently active in the system:

.. code-block:: bash

  /parameter_events
  /rosout
  /turtle1/cmd_vel
  /turtle1/color_sensor
  /turtle1/pose

``ros2 topic list -t`` will return the same list of topics, this time with the topic type appended in brackets after each:

.. code-block:: bash

  /parameter_events [rcl_interfaces/msg/ParameterEvent]
  /rosout [rcl_interfaces/msg/Log]
  /turtle1/cmd_vel [geometry_msgs/msg/Twist]
  /turtle1/color_sensor [turtlesim/msg/Color]
  /turtle1/pose [turtlesim/msg/Pose]

Topics have names and types.
These attributes, particularly the type, are how nodes know they’re talking about the same information as it moves over topics.

If you’re wondering where all these topics are in rqt_graph, you can uncheck all the boxes under **Hide:**

.. image:: unhide.png

For now, though, leave those options checked to avoid confusion.

4 ros2 topic echo
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To see the data being published on a topic, use:

.. code-block:: bash

    ros2 topic echo <topic_name>

> Since we know that ``/teleop_turtle`` publishes data to ``/turtlesim`` over the ``cmd_vel`` topic, lets use ``echo`` to introspect on that process:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we know that ``/teleop_turtle`` publishes data to ``/turtlesim`` over the ``cmd_vel`` topic, lets use ``echo`` to introspect on that topic:
```

Reviewer 2: Or maybe even:

```suggestion
Since we know that ``/teleop_turtle`` publishes data to ``/turtlesim`` over the ``cmd_vel`` topic, lets use ``echo`` to introspect the  data being published through that topic:
```

> Since we know that ``/teleop_turtle`` publishes data to ``/turtlesim`` over the ``cmd_vel`` topic, lets use ``echo`` to introspect on that process:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since we know that ``/teleop_turtle`` publishes data to ``/turtlesim`` over the ``/turtle1/cmd_vel`` topic, lets use ``echo`` to introspect on that process:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    ros2 topic echo /turtle1/cmd_vel

At first, this command won’t return any data.
That’s because it’s waiting for ``/teleop_turtle`` to publish something.

Return to the terminal where ``turtle_teleop_key`` is running and use the arrows to move the turtle around.

> Watch the terminal where you ``echo`` is running at the same time, and you’ll see position data being published for every movement you make:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Watch the terminal where your ``echo`` is running at the same time, and you’ll see position data being published for every movement you make:
```

.. code-block:: bash

  linear:
    x: 2.0
    y: 0.0
    z: 0.0
  angular:
    x: 0.0
    y: 0.0
    z: 0.0
    ---

Now return to rqt_graph and uncheck the **Debug** box.

.. image:: debug.png

``/_ros2cli_22409`` is the node created by the ``echo`` we just ran (the number will change).
Now you can see that the publisher is publishing data over the ``cmd_vel`` topic, and two subscribers are subscribed.

5 ros2 topic info
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Topics don’t have to only be point-to-point communication; it can be one-to-many, many-to-one, or many-to-many.

Another way to look at this is running:

.. code-block:: bash

    ros2 topic info /turtle1/cmd_vel

Which will return:

.. code-block:: bash

  Topic: /turtle1/cmd_vel
  Publisher count: 1
  Subscriber count: 2

> 6 ros2 msg show

Reviewer 3: I left a similar comment for the services tutorial.

What are peoples thoughts on using `ros2 interface` instead?

Though, `ros2 msg` and `ros2 srv` can be a little more concise, perhaps we should be encouraging people to use `ros2 interface` since it also supports actions and IDL interfaces. The main difference in usage for the `show` verb is that you need to provide the `.msg` or `.srv` suffix in order to see the ROS definition instead of the generated IDL (perhaps this could be improved in the tool if we can infer that it is a legacy type).

Reviewer 2: I would support moving in this direction, but you should probably bring it up at a ROS 2 meeting. At the very least we could mention here that `ros2 interface` will also work and will work for all kinds of things too.

Reviewer: I'm also fine with moving that direction, though I'd argue for a follow-up task to change all of them later so that @maryaB-osr can continue on with this PR.

Author: Yeah I'm not sure how many times this will come up by the end of all the tutorials, so I'll add it to the list of things that I'll follow up on once everything's merged into `staging`.

Thanks @jacobperron

.. code-block:: bash

  linear:
    x: 2.0
    y: 0.0
    z: 0.0
  angular:
    x: 0.0
    y: 0.0
    z: 0.0
    ---

7 ros2 topic pub
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Now that you have the message structure, you can publish data onto a topic directly from the command line using:

.. code-block:: bash

    ros2 topic pub <topic_name> <msg_type> ‘<args>’

The ``’<args>’`` argument is the actual data you’ll pass to the topic, in the structure you just discovered in the previous section.

It’s important to note that this argument needs to be input in YAML syntax.
Input the full command like so:

.. code-block:: bash

  ros2 topic pub --once /turtle1/cmd_vel geometry_msgs/msg/Twist '{linear: {x: 2.0, y: 0.0, z: 0.0}, angular: {x: 0.0, y: 0.0, z: 1.8}}'

``--once`` is an optional argument meaning “publish one message then exit”.

You will receive the following message in the terminal:

.. code-block:: bash

  publisher: beginning loop
  publishing #1: geometry_msgs.msg.Twist(linear=geometry_msgs.msg.Vector3(x=2.0, y=0.0, z=0.0), angular=geometry_msgs.msg.Vector3(x=0.0, y=0.0, z=1.8))

And you will see your turtle move like so:

.. image:: pub_once.png

> The turtle (and the real robots it represents) require a steady stream of commands to operate continuously.

Reviewer 2: Not all robots work like this (require a steady stream), but it is common. Maybe this should be reworded as:

```suggestion
The turtle (and commonly real robots which it is meant to emulate) require a steady stream of commands to operate continuously.
```

So, to get the turtle to keep moving, you can run:

.. code-block:: bash

  ros2 topic pub --rate 1 /turtle1/cmd_vel geometry_msgs/msg/Twist '{linear: {x: 2.0, y: 0.0, z: 0.0}, angular: {x: 0.0, y: 0.0, z: 1.8}}'

The difference here is the removal of the ``--once`` option and the addition of the ``--rate 1`` option, which tells ``ros2 topic pub`` to publish the command in a steady stream at 1 Hz.

.. image:: pub_stream.png

You can refresh rqt_graph to see what’s happening graphically.

> You will see the topic pub node (``/_ros2cli_publisher_…``) is publishing over the ``cmd_vel`` topic to both the topic echo node (``/_ros2cli_24…``) and the ``/turtlesim`` node now.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will see the ``ros 2 topic pub ...`` node (``/_ros2cli_publisher_…``) is publishing over the ``/turtle1/cmd_vel`` topic, and is being received by both the ``ros2 topic echo ...`` node (``/_ros2cli_24…``) and the ``/turtlesim`` node now.
```

.. image:: rqt_graph2.png

Finally, you can run ``echo`` on the ``pose`` topic and recheck rqt_graph:

.. code-block:: bash

  ros2 topic echo /turtle1/pose

.. image:: rqt_graph3.png

In this case, ``/turtlesim`` is now publishing to the ``pose`` topic, and a new ``echo`` node is subscribed.

8 ros2 topic hz
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For one last introspection on this process, you can report the rate at which data is published using:

.. code-block:: bash

    ros2 topic hz /turtle1/pose

It will return data on the rate at which the ``/turtlesim`` node is publishing data to the ``pose`` topic.

.. code-block:: bash

  average rate: 59.354
    min: 0.005s max: 0.027s std dev: 0.00284s window: 58

.. 9 rqt_plot
   ^^^^^^^^^^

>    Can't do this section now because there's some significant UI issues with rqt_plot for ROS 2

Reviewer 2: For reference here's the issue for that:

https://github.com/ros-visualization/rqt_plot/issues/39

.. _ROS2Topics:

Understanding ROS 2 topics
==========================

**Goal:** Use rqt_graph and command line tools to introspect ROS 2 topics.

**Tutorial level:** Beginner

**Time:** 20 minutes

.. contents:: Contents
   :depth: 2
   :local:

Background
----------

Topics act as a bus over which nodes exchange messages.
A node may publish data to any number of topics and simultaneously have subscriptions to any number of topics.

Topics are a vital element of the ROS graph.
ROS 2 breaks complex systems down into many modular nodes; this concept is covered in the tutorial "Understanding ROS 2 nodes".
.. link on nodes tutorial

> Topics are one of the important ways that data moves between nodes, and therefore between different parts of the system.

Reviewer: I kind of feel like these two paragraphs should be rearranged and combined.  For instance, something like this:

```
ROS 2 breaks complex systems down into many module nodes; this concept is covered in the tutorial "Understanding ROS 2 nodes".
Topics are a vital element of the ROS graph that act as a bus for nodes to exchange messages.
A node may publish data to any number of topics and simultaneously have subscriptions to any number of topics.
Topics are one of the important ways that data moves between nodes, and therefore between different parts of the system.
```

Author: That makes a lot more sense!
